The birth rate among middle-class Negroes is much
less than it is among middle-class whites. So
you're going back to Harvard, Dan, to continue
this work in the fall? Right, and come back here
again in the spring.
After your 66th birthday, you have to retire from
administrative jobs at Harvard.
You could continue to teach on a half-time basis
for four years until you're 70. I'm 67 now.
You were explaining why you were only going to
teach half-time? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah.
So I'm teaching there in the fall semester and here
at UCSD in the spring.
When you come back to UCSD, what sort of courses do
you offer?
Well, my new professorship is professor of
science and public policy, the kind of
professorship that old professors have. I don't
know much science anymore.
And the course I taught, I taught an undergraduate
course this spring called Technology in the Poor
Countries, which I talked about.
And in Harvard, I teach a course, undergraduate
course, called Human Population to Natural
Resources. And I have a group of graduate students
who are getting their doctorate degrees. And I
take part in three or four other courses and
population courses that are given under the
auspices of the Center for Population Studies.
But the only course I'm solely responsible for is
this big undergraduate
course. Now, I now have a series of questions and
comments I'd like for you to make up on various
things that you've done or things you've said in
your career. First, the Capricorn expedition.
Well, was the major purpose of the Capricorn
expedition to measure heat loss? Heat flow, you
mean? Heat flow, right. No. Like all these, like
most of these big expeditions, it was to,
it was, it had several purposes, but the principal
purpose was the geology and geophysics of the of
the deep sea floor of the Pacific. And we studied
that basically in four or five different ways. One
was by the main concern. That was the seismic
refraction studies, which which basically gave
the depth of sediments, the depth of what's called
the second layer, and the depth to the Mohorovic
discontinuity.
And some idea about the sound velocity. In fact, a
good idea about the sound velocity in these
different layers.
The second was deep sea sounding. And Bill Menard
and Bob Fisher were in charge of it. that part of the
operation.
We were particularly interested here in the Tonga
Trench, which is one of the great deeps, oceanic
deeps of the world. It may even be the deepest,
although there are four deeps that are just about
the same depth, the Mindanao Trench, the Marianas
Trench, the Tonga Trench, and the Kuril Trench.
And we wanted to find out what its shape was, what it
actually looked like. Because Bob Fisher
particularly had developed a hypothesis that new
trenches would be V-shaped in cross-section,
have practically no sediments in them, whereas
old trenches would have a flat bottom. The U-shape
would be U-shaped. Not necessarily old trenches,
but trenches that had A very considerable
sediment source nearby would have a flat bottom,
and the sediments would accumulate in them. And of
course, it turned out that the Tonga Trench was
B-shaped, flat B. And the other part of the job of
studying the trench was, what were the sediments
like? And what sediments there were were
practically all volcanic there. And this was, as
you might expect, because only
the very youngest sediments were still there. The
others were being carried down into the crust of
the Earth.
And the problem of how deep it was and how variable
the depth was, one of the interesting discoveries
was a great seamount on the side of it. of the
trench, of the volcano that had been carried down
into the trench. It was already several hundred
meters deep.
We were interested in one of the other interesting
things we did was to look at a place called Alexa
Bank, which is north of the Fiji Islands, between
the Fiji Islands and the Marianas Islands, or the
Marshall Islands, which was a sunken atoll. An
atoll that never recovered after the
Pleistocene. The top of it is about 100, 200 people
over the surface. And we had divers, scuba divers,
who went down and looked at this. It's just a
typical atoll, but one which was never able to
build up as fast as the water rose. And the result
was that it's now a fossil atoll. So another thing
that we were interested in was the bottom, was the
topography of what was called what is now called
the Easter Island Rise, the mid-ocean ridge in the
South Pacific, which continues all the way into
the Gulf of California, and California itself is
really part of the Easter Island Rise, separated
with what we now call the Pacific Plate from the
American Plate, the North American Plate.
Another thing was, of course, the measurement of
the heat flow. We'd already measured that on the
mid-pack exposition in the area between the
Marshall Islands and the Hawaiian Islands. We got
a lot more measurements on Capricorn. And
another, Ronald Mason was on board. And his
interest was in making magnetic surveys,
essentially towing the magnetometer and then
making magnetic surveys around some of the South
Pacific atolls. We were also very much interested
in the sediments that we had. We took a lot of long
quarters. And we had a new tool, a new toy, if you
will. We had a huge winch that was capable of
getting to the bottom of the Tawny Trench.
This winch didn't work very well. It was like a
fishing wheel that overruns. It would get out of
control, and then the wire would get snarled,
badly snarled.
And this happened to us before we went to Fiji, and
we spent quite a bit of time in Fiji getting the wire
spliced and the winch refitted. It happened again
to us in the Tonga Trench, and we had about 30,000
feet of cable over the side. It's a tapered cable,
small at the outer end, big at the inner end.
Because otherwise, the cable wouldn't hold its
own weight in those great depths. And this was one
of the worst days I ever spent in my life. The wire
got badly kinked. And so what we had to do was to cut
it and remove the kinked portion and then splice it
together again. And we had about, I don't know, six
or seven tons weight hanging over the ship and the
A-frame and the stern of the ship. This was on the
Horizon. Horizon was the one that had the big wind.
Not the Horizon, I'm sorry, Spencer F. Baird.
Horizon was the two-ship expedition, Horizon and
Spencer F. Baird.
It took 24 hours to do this. And at all the time, you
were afraid something was going to slip. and put
wire clamps on the bitter end, the outer end of the
cable, and have enough
room at the back of this clamp so that you could
splice it, so you could make a long splice. Very
painful, difficult process with three-quarters
cable. But anyhow, he did it and brought it out. And
we used the wedge after that quite successfully.
That was the last time that the goddamn thing fell.
Gosh, what an awful.
It would have been, we gradually learned in the
oceanographic business to handle heavier and
heavier weights, more and more massive
equipment. And that's, of course, the ultimate
The result of this is this huge Glomar Challenger,
which stores 100 tons
of pipe in the bottom. So the sediments, the heat
flow, the bottom topography, the magnetic
measurements,
looking at shallow water features like Falcon
Bank, which volcano that gets cleaned off. In a few
years, every time it erupts, and it creates a pile
of volcanic debris several hundred feet high.
It's an island. It then gets washed away by the
waves. And in between eruptions, it's about 50
feet deep, or at least 25 feet deep. I remember we
were very touchy about going on approaching
Stalkin Island, and we were afraid we might go and
drown. I
remember Art Maxwell coming up to me and saying,
we're aground.
And what had happened was we backed up, and we were
getting the bubbles from our own weight.
morning ground, thank God.
We did a lot of work in the islands, like in the
Beattie Islands, a lot of topography in shallow
water.
We started out from Bikini, or from Quagmire, from
Bikini, actually, where both ships had been
involved in one of the one of the big hydrogen bomb
tests.
And then went from there to the Fiji Islands, and
the Fijis to the Tonga Islands, and the Tongas to
Tahiti, and Tahiti to the Tuamotus, and from the
Tuamotus to the Marquesas, and then home across
the eastern North Pacific. All together lasted
about four months. I remember we spent Christmas
in the Tonga Islands.
And we had many subsidiary projects. For example,
one of the most interesting things about high
islands in the Pacific, like some of the Tonga
Islands, is that there's a notch cut just in the
tidal zone. These are limestone islands. And you
get erosion of the limestone in the intertidal
zone. The profile of the island would be a cliff
like this, cut back like this, and then a reef out
here. And what in the world causes that? Nobody
really knows what causes it. Because the ocean is
super saturated, the surface ocean water is super
saturated with calcium carbonate. But
apparently in the intertidal zone, you have
sufficient biological activity so that the pH is
lowered part of the time. by organic production of
CO2 and organic production of organic acids,
which allows the calcium carbonate to dissolve.
Walter Monk was on the expedition. Bill
Menard, Bill Riedel, Bob Fisher, Russ Ray, Helen
Ray was on it. She joined us in Tonga and went the
rest of the way with us. We had most of the best top
Iranians. I think was on board, too. I'm sure
he was. We had most of the geologists and
geophysicists of the Scripps Institution on this
expedition.
And it was a, we didn't really learn
as much from that expedition as we did from
mid-pack, which was the first one of our
expeditions. But it was there that the rust rays
definitely showed that the sediments were very
thin, and our heat flow measurements showed that
the heat flow was very high. But
we learned a lot about the trench, and that was
perhaps the most important thing. We did a bit of
work on the trenches off the American coast. the
Acapulco Trench and the Peru-Chile Trench.
And we learned a good deal about the South Pacific
deep sea sediments.
And gradually, over the years, we had a series of
expeditions like this. Capricorn was the only two
that I led, but we had a lot of others led by the other
people that I described yesterday. And I think we
contributed very fundamentally to the
ideas of sea floor spreading and plate tectonics.
I guess the most significant thing that we did as it
turned out, was the work that Ronald Mason did
right off the California coast. He wanted to make a
magnetic, using this towed magnetometer that
Victor Wacky invented during World War II, he
wanted to make a magnetic survey. The coast
geodetic survey was at that time making a
topographic survey of the sea floor up to 200 or 300
miles off California. Ron thought it would be a
good idea to make a magnetic survey at the same time
as this topographic survey is being made. And I
thought it would too, although I didn't quite know
why. But it was a new geophysical tool that was
bound to show something. And what he found when he
worked up the data was that the remnant magnetism
had a very Well, it had a remarkable pattern. It had
a pattern of long stripes of high and low magnetic
field, of ridges, magnetic ridges that would be
100 miles long or so, 150 miles long, and then
separated by magnetic look, by magnetic valleys,
if you will, ridge and valley structure and
contiguous series of these things. These were cut
by what Bill Menard called fracture zones.
And they didn't continue across the fracture
zones. Later, Victor Boffier and Arthur Roth
continued this work. And they showed that, in
fact, the whole pattern of Richardson Cross was
displaced on the two sides of a fracture zone by
distances up to several hundred kilometers. It
wasn't a lot. Well, that was really the real
confirmation of the ideas of movement of plates of
the sea floor.
And it was later that people in England got the idea
that these magnetic stripes were alternately
dikes of volcanic rock that were coming up along
the mid-ocean ridges and moving across the ocean
floor to the edges of the plates. That's the notion
of sea floor spreading, which is one of the basic
concepts of plate tectonics. The ocean floor was
continually being renewed along the mid-ocean
ridge and continually moving toward the edges of
the ocean basin. Bob Fisher and I wrote a paper.
which we call the trenches of the Pacific, about
1954, I guess, in which we analyzed the remarkable
features of the trenches. And it
seemed quite clear to us that there must be
downward movement under the trenches. And that's
what we said, in fact. And the reason was that they
had no sediment in them. They had negative gravity
anomalies. They had very low heat flow.
And this
meant that if you had a downward force acting
downward to pull the rock down and to cool it off,
pull the heat down. Whereas in the mid-ocean
ridge, there was an upward moving arm of a
convection cell, believe it or not, you had a high
heat flow over the ridges. And that was what Martin
Maxwell had found on a later expedition to the
eastern South Pacific. Over the Easter Island
rise, there was high heat flow intermediate
between the ridge and the trench and very low heat
flow over the trench or near the trench.
And then we wrote a paper, Maxwell and Bullard and I
wrote a paper on the measurements of heat cells, in
which we said we couldn't explain these in any
other way than by huge convection cells in the
mantle rising along the ridges and sinking along
the trenches, and that the rock was being carried
along the sea floor from the ridge to the trench. We
didn't have the wit to...
make the connection between this process and this
magnetic striking, which in fact occurs all over
the ocean, all over the deep sea, which is the
clearest evidence there is of that movement of the
bottom of the ocean floor away from the ridges and
toward the trenches, or toward the continental
boundary. This, of course, also explains why
there's so little sediment. It had previously
been thought that there must be thousands of feet
of sediment, of the deep sea sediments, which had
been accumulating since the beginning of
geologic time. It turned out there were only about
100 meters of sediment in much of the sea floor. And
nobody could possibly figure out say that this had
been accumulated since the beginning of
geological time. It just wasn't anywhere near
enough of it. Something must have been getting our
set of them. What was getting them was that they
were moving away into the trenches and being
carried down into the interior of the Earth. And
nobody has ever found anything on the ocean floor
older than about mid-potation, about 150 million
years old. Our mid-pack expedition, we found on
the tops of these deep, 6,000-foot seamounts of
shallow water fossils, which were about 100
million years old, late Cretaceous. That was
another indication that the ocean floor was very
young. All these phenomena had occurred just in
the last really few minutes of geologic time.
I've thought for a while that maybe the
explanation for the deep seamounts was that the
volume of the ocean had increased a lot in the last
100 million years. But I think Bill Menard gave the
true explanation, and that was that the seamounts
formed on the ridges, the volcanoes on the ridge,
and then moved down the slope from the ridge to the
deep sea. And they just gradually got deeper and
deeper as they went further from the ridge. When
you say increase in the volume of the ocean, is that
when you suggest that the Pacific seabed dropped
drastically 100 million years ago? Or sometimes.
Sometimes. Not 100 million years. Within the last
100 million years. I don't think that that's
certainly not a, probably not a correct
explanation, and certainly not a necessary
explanation. I think it's more likely that what
happened is that the volcano simply moved into
deeper water. They were in shallow water. Their
tops were at the surface, planed off at the
surface, and moved into water that was about 6,000
feet deeper. And their tops are therefore now
6,000 feet deep.
But they're planed off, retaining the shallow
water character. And the atolls formed the same
way. The only difference being the atolls moved
slowly enough so that coral reef animals could
keep up with the sinking. Whereas these deep sea
mounds, these gills, apparently moved too fast
before the corals could get started or could
really maintain themselves.
We have
a remarkable collection of people who were
working on these different aspects of the geology
and geophysics. Russ Rade and George Shore, Art
Maxwell and Dick Von Herzen, Art Roth, Ronald
Mason, Victor Bacchier,
Gustav Arrhenius, Ed Goldberg, Henry Roche, and
later, Pam Craig and Hans Seuss.
And then the And that's why I say it was one of the
great ages of exploration, because this is when we
really found that the ocean floor is quite
different in many ways than the continents are,
very fundamentally different than the
continents. It's quite obvious now with this idea
of sea floor spreading and that
on the sea floor you have half a dozen features that
are unique. One of them is the seamounts and the
atolls. Another is the trenches. Another is the
mid-ocean ridges. So another is what are called
abyssal plains, absolutely flat plains that
extend for hundreds of miles. These were first
discovered by Morris Ewing in Atlanta, but they
exist also in the Pacific.
These are due to huge masses of sediment being
carried down by density currents from the
continental slope and spreading in something
like a base surge of Bikini over a very wide area and
then settling down. Still another, which was Bill
Menard's major discovery, was the fraction
zones, which we now know cut across the the
mid-ocean ridges and displaced them. The
mid-ocean ridges are displaced about every 100 or
200 miles by a fracture zone,
which was explained by Tuzo Wilson. These are
trans-current faults. The problem is what
happens at the end of these things, at the end of
them. You have to have sinking or rising of
material. And so they extend all the way to the
place where sinking is occurring, the trenches,
in other words. And the whole series, there are a
whole lot of them here in the Pacific. Then they
were later discovered in the Atlantic, too. The
difference in the discoveries and who made the
discoveries was basically what ocean people were
working on in the Atlantic, the mid-ocean ridge.
was a much more clear-cut feature and had this
crack down the middle of it, a whole series of
cracks, which were places where the lava was
rising. In the Pacific, the Easter Island rise is
the same kind of a feature, but a much gentler
feature. It didn't exhibit its mid-ridge crack.
On the other hand, the fracture zones were much
more clearly present and easily seen in the
Pacific. And the trenches are almost not quite,
but almost entirely of the city, ocean phenomena.
And these were the basic building blocks of the
theory of seafloor spreading and the theory of
plate tectonics. And I guess
I think the credit for the actual Putting things
together, the synthesis belongs to a series of
people, a group of people, none of whom are in
scripts. Bob Dietz, who was here as a graduate,
took his PhD here, but later worked with Noah, and
Harry Hess at Princeton, and a couple of guys at
Cambridge, England.
Matthews and Drummond. So Drummond, Matthews,
and the name of the other one.
I don't remember who they were, but Matthew was one
of them. Neither Ewing, who did a tremendous
amount of actual data gathering in the sea, nor we,
really had the imagination to put it all together,
as we did. Seaboard spreaders and plate tectonics
people did.